                                                     Regularizing Model-Based Planning with
                                                              Energy-Based Models
                                                                 Rinu Boney     Juho Kannala        Alexander Ilin
                                                                         Department of Computer Science
                                                                            Aalto University, Finland
                                                                        firstname.lastname@aalto.fi




arXiv:1910.05527v1 [cs.LG] 12 Oct 2019
                                                  Abstract: Model-based reinforcement learning could enable sample-efficient
                                                  learning by quickly acquiring rich knowledge about the world and using it to
                                                  improve behaviour without additional data. Learned dynamics models can be
                                                  directly used for planning actions but this has been challenging because of in-
                                                  accuracies in the learned models. In this paper, we focus on planning with learned
                                                  dynamics models and propose to regularize it using energy estimates of state tran-
                                                  sitions in the environment. We visually demonstrate the effectiveness of the pro-
                                                  posed method and show that off-policy training of an energy estimator can be
                                                  effectively used to regularize planning with pre-trained dynamics models. Fur-
                                                  ther, we demonstrate that the proposed method enables sample-efficient learning
                                                  to achieve competitive performance in challenging continuous control tasks such
                                                  as Half-cheetah and Ant in just a few minutes of experience.

                                                  Keywords: model-based reinforcement learning, energy-based learning

                                         1   Introduction
                                         Reinforcement learning deals with taking sequences of actions in previously unknown environments,
                                         to maximize cumulative rewards. Deep reinforcement learning combines the power of deep neural
                                         networks for function approximation with reinforcement learning algorithms. Such algorithms have
                                         recently been successful in solving several challenging problems [1, 2, 3]. However, these algo-
                                         rithms are often not sample-efficient, typically requiring an unreasonable amount of interactions in
                                         an environment [1, 3, 4]. In real world applications, it is often the case that collecting data is expen-
                                         sive, motivating the need for algorithms that can learn from a minimal number of interactions with
                                         the environment.
                                         Effectively using a model of the environment for learning could result in a significant increase of
                                         sample-efficiency [5, 6]. This is because models introduce an inductive bias that the environment
                                         behaves in a forward generative causal direction. Models can be directly used for planning actions
                                         that maximize the sum of expected rewards in a finite horizon. Previous works have successfully
                                         used fast and accurate simulators of the environment for planning, to solve challenging tasks such
                                         as control of a Humanoid [6, 7]. However, most real-world problems do not come with a fast and
                                         accurate simulator and engineering one from scratch is a laborious task. Even if a simulator exists:
                                         1) maintaining the simulator to accommodate for changes in the real-world is a lot of manual work,
                                         and 2) matching the true state of the environment and the simulator is not trivial. This motivates
                                         the need for learning dynamics models of the environment. Dynamics models of the environment
                                         can be efficiently learned using supervised learning techniques [8] and also efficiently adapted to
                                         changes in the environment [9].
                                         Planning with learned dynamics models is challenging because the planner can exploit the inaccu-
                                         racies of the model to arrive at actions that are imagined to produce highly over-optimistic rewards
                                         (see Figure 5). In this paper, we propose to regularize model-based planning with an energy-based
                                         model trained on the same transitions as the dynamics model. The planning procedure is augmented
                                         with an additive cost of minimizing the energy of the imagined transitions. This penalizes the plan-
                                         ner from producing trajectories with transitions that are outside the training data distribution (that

                                         3rd Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL 2019), Osaka, Japan.
Figure 1: Overview of training loop. We initially perform random exploration for one or more
episodes to train the dynamics model and then interact with the environment by planning using the
learned dynamics model. At the end of each episode, we re-train the dynamics model on the past
experience.

is, transitions with high energy estimates). We demonstrate that the proposed method is effective
at regularizing model-based planning from exploiting inaccuracies of the model. Previous works
have proposed to use ensembles of models to deal with this problem [5]. We show that the proposed
method can further improve the performance of planning on top of pre-trained ensemble of mod-
els. Furthermore, we show that the proposed method enables sample-efficient learning to achieve
competitive performance in five popular continuous control tasks.

2   Model-Based Planning
In this section, we formalize the problem setting as a Markov Decision Process (MDP). At every
discrete time-step t, the environment is in state st , the agent takes an action at to receive a scalar
reward rt = r(st , at ) and the environment transitions to the next state st+1 , following the dynamics
st+1 = f (st , at ). The goal of the agentP
                                          is to choose actions at so as to maximize the sum of expected
                                             ∞
future rewards (called return), G = E [ t=0 r(st , at )].
In this paper, we focus on finite-horizon planning with learned dynamics models fˆ. Also, we assume
that the reward function r(st , at ) is known and that the state st is fully observed. Forward dynamics
models of the environment can be learned using supervised learning techniques to predict the next
state st+1 from the current state st and action at :
                                            st+1 = fˆ(st , at ) .
At time-step t, the agent can plan a sequence of actions {at , . . . , at+H } by unrolling the learned
dynamics model to maximize the sum of rewards:
                                                       "t+H               #
                                                        X
                           ∗            ∗
                          at , . . . , at+H = argmax E      r(sτ , aτ ) ,                           (1)
                                             at ,...,at+H
                                                               τ =t
such that sτ +1 = f (sτ , aτ ). Since we do not have access to the true dynamics f , we plan using the
following objective as a proxy to the true objective:
                                                               t+H
                                                               X
                              a∗t , . . . , a∗t+H = argmax            r(sτ , aτ ) ,                 (2)
                                                at ,...,at+H
                                                               τ =t

such that sτ +1 = fˆ(sτ , aτ ). We use model-predictive control (MPC) [10, 8] to adapt our plans to
new states, that is we apply just the first action from the optimized sequence and re-plan at next step.
This reduces the effect of error accumulation due to multi-step predictions using the model.
We initially train the dynamics model using data collected by executing a random policy for one or
more episodes. More episodes of initial exploration reduces the effect of the initial model weights.
The initial data can also be collected by an existing policy, for example human demonstrations
or human-engineered controllers. After training the dynamics models, we interact with the envi-
ronment using model-based planning (Equation 2). The (st , at , st+1 ) transition observed at each
interaction is stored in a replay buffer along with the initial data and the model is re-trained on the
replay buffer at the end of each episode. We iterate this alternating process of training the dynamics
model and model-based planning. An overview of the training loop is illustrated in Figure 1.


                                                    2
Figure 2: Computational graph of regularizing model-based planning with energy-based models. At
each timestep t − 1, the environment is in a state st−1 and we initially consider an action trajectory
{at , at+1 , . . . , at+H } that we could apply for the next H timesteps. The dynamics model is used to
predict the future state transitions {s̃t , s̃t+1 , . . . , s̃t+H } at each timestep for the considered action
trajectory. The rewards at each time-step is computed directly from the state-action pairs, resulting in
a prediction of the finite-horizon cumulative reward. An additive regularization term is augmented
to the planning objective by computing the energy of each (s̃τ , aτ , s̃τ +1 ) transition. The action
trajectory {at , at+1 , . . . , at+H } can be optimized to maximize this regularized planning objective.


2.1    Regularizing Model-Based Planning

Directly optimizing the objective in Equation 2 is challenging because fˆ is only an approximation
of the true dynamics f . Deep neural networks are commonly used as function approximators to
learn fˆ and they are amenable to erroneous predictions for samples outside the data distribution.
An effective optimizer can be easily deceived by these erroneous predictions, converging to action
trajectories that are imagined to produce very high rewards but is not the case in reality. This
problem can be alleviated by penalizing the optimizer from considering trajectories that are outside
the training distribution of the learned dynamics model fˆ. This can be achieved by augmenting the
planning objective with an additive term to maximize the probability of imagined transitions:
                                       t+H
                                       X
      a∗t , . . . , a∗t+H = argmax            r(sτ , aτ ) + α log p(st , at , st+1 , . . . , st+H , at+H , st+H+1 ) .
                        at ,...,at+H
                                       τ =t

where the scalar α modulates the weight between both costs. We approximate the joint probability
of the whole trajectory as a sum of joint probabilities of each transition in the trajectory:
                                                       t+H
                                                       X
                  a∗t , . . . , a∗t+H = argmax                [r(sτ , aτ ) + α log p(sτ , aτ , sτ +1 )] .               (3)
                                        at ,...,at+H
                                                       τ =t


Assume that we want to learn the probability density function using a parameterized model p(xτ ; θ),
where xτ = [sτ , aτ , sτ +1 ]. The energy function E(xτ ; θ) is the unnormalized log-density, that is
the probability density function p(xτ ) is defined as:
                                                        1
                                       p(xτ ; θ) =          exp (−E(xτ ; θ)) ,
                                                       Z(θ)

where Z(θ) = exp (−E(x0τ ; θ))dx0τ is the partition function which normalizes the probability
                 R
density. Computing the partition function is generally intractable in practice and is not important for
regularization in Equation 3 since it does not depend on xτ . We can instead learn and use the energy
function for regularizing model-based planning:
                                                         t+H
                                                         X
                    a∗t , . . . , a∗t+H = argmax                [r(sτ , aτ ) − αE(sτ , aτ , sτ +1 )] .                  (4)
                                          at ,...,at+H
                                                         τ =t


                                                                3
