Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023




N EURAL C AUSAL M ODELS FOR C OUNTERFACTUAL
I DENTIFICATION AND E STIMATION
 Kevin Xia and Yushu Pan and Elias Bareinboim
 Causal Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
 Columbia University, USA
 {kevinmxia,yushupan,eb}@cs.columbia.edu


                                             A BSTRACT
         Evaluating hypothetical statements about how the world would be had a different
         course of action been taken is arguably one key capability expected from mod-
         ern AI systems. Counterfactual reasoning underpins discussions in fairness, the
         determination of blame and responsibility, credit assignment, and regret. In this
         paper, we study the evaluation of counterfactual statements through neural models.
         Specifically, we tackle two causal problems required to make such evaluations,
         i.e., counterfactual identification and estimation from an arbitrary combination of
         observational and experimental data. First, we show that neural causal models
         (NCMs) are expressive enough and encode the structural constraints necessary
         for performing counterfactual reasoning. Second, we develop an algorithm for
         simultaneously identifying and estimating counterfactual distributions. We show
         that this algorithm is sound and complete for deciding counterfactual identification
         in general settings. Third, considering the practical implications of these results, we
         introduce a new strategy for modeling NCMs using generative adversarial networks.
         Simulations corroborate with the proposed methodology.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Counterfactual reasoning is one of human’s high-level cognitive capabilities, used across a wide
range of affairs, including determining how objects interact, assigning responsibility, credit and
blame, and articulating explanations. Counterfactual statements underpin prototypical questions of
the form "what if–" and "why–", which inquire about hypothetical worlds that have not necessarily
been realized (Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018). If a patient Alice had taken a drug and died, one may
wonder, "why did Alice die?"; "was it the drug that killed her?"; "would she be alive had she not
taken the drug?". In the context of fairness, why did an applicant, Joe, not get the job offer? Would
the outcome have changed had Joe been a Ph.D.? Or perhaps of a different race? These are examples
of fundamental questions about attribution and explanation, which evoke hypothetical scenarios that
disagree with the current reality and which not even experimental studies can reconstruct.
We build on the semantics of counterfactuals based on a generative process called structural causal
model (SCM) (Pearl, 2000). A fully instantiated SCM M∗ describes a collection of causal mecha-
nisms and distribution over exogenous conditions. Each M∗ induces families of qualitatively different
distributions related to the activities of seeing (called observational), doing (interventional), and
imagining (counterfactual), which together are known as the ladder of causation (Pearl & Mackenzie,
2018; Bareinboim et al., 2022); also called the Pearl Causal Hierarchy (PCH). The PCH is a contain-
ment hierarchy in which distributions can be put in increasingly refined layers: observational content
goes into layer 1 (L1 ); experimental to layer 2 (L2 ); counterfactual to layer 3 (L3 ). It is understood
that there are questions about layers 2 and 3 that cannot be answered (i.e. are underdetermined), even
given all information in the world about layer 1; further, layer 3 questions are still underdetermined
given data from layers 1 and 2 (Bareinboim et al., 2022; Ibeling & Icard, 2020).
Counterfactuals represent the more detailed, finest type of knowledge encoded in the PCH, so
naturally, having the ability to evaluate counterfactual distributions is an attractive proposition. In
practice, a fully specified model M∗ is almost never observable, which leads to the question – how
can a counterfactual statement, from L∗3 , be evaluated using a combination of observational and
experimental data (from L∗1 and L∗2 )? This question embodies the challenge of cross-layer inferences,
which entail solving two challenging causal problems in tandem, identification and estimation.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023




In the more traditional literature of causal inference,               (a)                                       (b)
                                                                  Unobserved                                 Learned/
there are different symbolic methods for solving these           Nature/Truth                              Hypothesized
problems in various settings and under different as-
sumptions. In the context of identification, there ex-             SCM M∗                  Causal
                                                                                          Diagram
                                                                                                             NCM M  c
ists an arsenal of results that includes celebrated meth-       = hF ∗ , P (U∗ )i            G             = h F,
                                                                                                               b  P (U)i
                                                                                                                      b

ods such as Pearl’s do-calculus (Pearl, 1995), and go                                       G-Constraint

through different algorithmic methods when consid- PCH: L1∗ L2∗ L3∗                                       L1     L2     L3
ering inferences for L2 - (Tian & Pearl, 2002; Shpitser
& Pearl, 2006; Huang & Valtorta, 2006; Bareinboim                      Training (L = L ,
                                                                                       1
                                                                                           ∗
                                                                                            ∗
                                                                                            1
                                                                                L =L )2
& Pearl, 2012; Lee et al., 2019; Lee & Bareinboim,                                         2



2020; 2021) and L3 -distributions (Heckman, 1992; Figure 1: The l.h.s. contains the true SCM
Pearl, 2001; Avin et al., 2005; Shpitser & Pearl, 2009; M∗ that induces PCH’s three layers. The
Shpitser & Sherman, 2018; Zhang & Bareinboim,
2018; Correa et al., 2021). On the estimation side, r.h.s. contains a neural model M constrained
                                                                                                         c
                                                                                                                     ∗
there are various methods including the celebrated by inductive∗ bias G (entailed by M ) and
Propensity Score/IPW for the backdoor case (Rubin,        matching    M         on  L 1  and    L  2   through    training.
1978; Horvitz & Thompson, 1952; Kennedy, 2019; Kallus & Uehara, 2020), and some more relaxed
settings (Fulcher et al., 2019; Jung et al., 2020; 2021), but the literature is somewhat scarcer and less
developed. In fact, there is a lack of estimation methods for L3 quantities in most settings.
On another thread in the literature, deep learning methods have achieved outstanding empirical
success in solving a wide range of tasks in fields such as computer vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012),
speech recognition (Graves & Jaitly, 2014), and game playing (Mnih et al., 2013). One key feature
of deep learning is its ability to allow inferences to scale with the data to high dimensional settings.
We study here the suitability of the neural approach to tackle the problems of causal identification
and estimation while trying to leverage the benefits of these new advances experienced in non-causal
settings. 1 The idea behind the approach pursued here is illustrated in Fig. 1. Specifically, we will
search for a neural model M  c (r.h.s.) that has the same generative capability of the true, unobserved
          ∗
SCM M (l.h.s.); in other words, M      c should be able to generate the same observed/inputted data,
             ∗              ∗ 2
i.e., L1 = L1 and L2 = L2 . To tackle this task in practice, we use an inductive bias for the neural
model in the form of a causal diagram (Pearl, 2000; Spirtes et al., 2000; Bareinboim & Pearl, 2016),
which is a parsimonious description of the mechanisms (F ∗ ) and exogenous conditions (P (U∗ )) of
the generating SCM. 3 The question then becomes: under what conditions can a model trained using
this combination of qualitative inductive bias and the available data be suitable to answer questions
about hypothetical counterfactual worlds, as if we had access to the true M∗ ?
There exists a growing literature that leverages modern neural methods to solve causal inference
tasks.1 Our approach based on proxy causal models will answer causal queries by direct evaluation
through a parameterized neural model M     c fitted on the data generated by M∗ . 4 For instance, some
recent work solves the estimation of interventional (L2 ) or counterfactual (L3 ) distributions from
observational (L1 ) data in Markovian settings, implemented through architectures such as GANs,
flows, GNNs, and VGAEs (Kocaoglu et al., 2018; Pawlowski et al., 2020; Zecevic et al., 2021;
Sanchez-Martin et al., 2021). In some real-world settings, Markovianity is a too stringent condition
(see discussion in App. D.4) and may be violated, which leads to the separation between layers 1 and
2, and, in turn, issues of causal identification. 5 The proxy approach discussed above was pursued in
Xia et al. (2021) to solve the identification and estimation of interventional distributions (L2 ) from
observational data (L1 ) in non-Markovian settings. 6 This work introduced an object we leverage
throughout this paper called Neural Causal Model (NCM, for short), which is a class of SCMs
constrained to neural network functions and fixed distributions over the exogenous variables. While
    1
       One of our motivations is that these methods showed great promise at estimating effects from observational
data under backdoor/ignorability conditions (Shalit et al., 2017; Louizos et al., 2017; Li & Fu, 2017; Johansson
et al., 2016; Yao et al., 2018; Yoon et al., 2018; Kallus, 2020; Shi et al., 2019; Du et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2020).
    2
      This represents an extreme case where all L1 - and L2 -distributions are provided as data. In practice, this
may be unrealistic, and our method takes as input any arbitrary subset of distributions from L1 and L2 .
    3
      When imposed on neural models, they enforce equality constraints connecting layer 1 and layer 2 quantities,
defined formally through the causal Bayesian network (CBN) data structure (Bareinboim et al., 2022, Def. 16).
    4
      In general, Mc does not need to, and will not be equal to the true SCM M∗ .
    5
      Layer 3 differs from lower layers even in Markovian models; see Bareinboim et al. (2022, Ex. 7).
    6
      Witty et al. (2021) shows a related approach taking the Bayesian route; further details, see Appendix C.


                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023




NCMs have been shown to be able to solve the identification and estimation tasks for L2 queries,
their potential for counterfactual inferences is still largely unexplored, and existing implementations
have been constrained to low-dimensional settings.
Despite all the progress achieved so far, no practical methods exist for estimating counterfactual
(L3 ) distributions in the general setting where an arbitrary combination of observational (L1 ) and
experimental (L2 ) distributions is available, and unobserved confounders exist (i.e. Markovianity
does not hold). Hence, in addition to providing the first neural method of counterfactual identification,
this paper establishes the first general counterfactual estimation technique even among non-neural
methods, leveraging the neural toolkit for scalable inferences. Specifically, our contributions are:
1. We prove that when fitted with a graphical inductive bias, the NCM encodes the L3 -constraints
necessary for performing counterfactual inference (Thm. 1), and that they are still expressive enough
to model the underlying data-generating model, which is not necessarily a neural network (Thm. 2).
2. We show that counterfactual identification within a neural proxy model setting is equivalent to
established symbolic approaches (Thm. 3). We leverage this duality to develop an optimization
procedure (Alg. 1) for counterfactual identification and estimation that is both sound and complete
(Corol. 2). The approach is general in that it accepts any combination of inputs from L1 and L2 , it
works in any causal diagram setting, and it does not require the Markovianity assumption to hold.
3. We develop a new approach to modeling the NCM using generative adversarial networks (GANs)
(Goodfellow et al., 2014), capable of robustly scaling inferences to high dimensions (Alg. 3). We
then show how GAN-NCMs can solve the challenging optimization problems in identifying and
estimating counterfactuals in practice. Experiments are provided in Sec. 5 and proofs in Appendix A.
All supplementary material can be found in the full technical report (Xia et al., 2022).
Preliminaries. We now introduce the notation and definitions used throughout the paper. We use
uppercase letters (X) to denote random variables and lowercase letters (x) to denote corresponding
values. Similarly, bold uppercase (X) and lower case (x) letters are used to denote sets of random
variables and values respectively. We use DX to denote the domain of X and DX = DX1 ×· · ·×DXk
for the domain of X = {X1 , . . . , Xk }. We denote P (X = x) (which we will often shorten to P (x))
as the probability of X taking the values x under the probability distribution P (X).
We utilize the basic semantic framework of structural causal models (SCMs), as defined in (Pearl,
2000, Ch. 7). An SCM M consists of endogenous variables V, exogenous variables U with
distribution P (U), and mechanisms F. F contains a function fVi for each variable Vi that maps
endogenous parents PaVi and exogenous parents UVi to Vi . Each M induces a causal diagram G,
where every Vi ∈ V is a vertex, there is a directed arrow (Vj → Vi ) for every Vi ∈ V and Vj ∈ PaVi ,
and there is a dashed-bidirected arrow (Vj L9999K Vi ) for every pair Vi , Vj ∈ V such that UVi and
UVj are not independent. For further details, see (Bareinboim et al., 2022, Def. 13/16, Thm. 4). The
exogenous UVi ’s are not assumed independent (i.e. Markovianity is not required). Our treatment is
constrained to recursive SCMs (implying acyclic causal diagrams) with finite domains over V (see
Apps. A/E for details). Each SCM M assigns values to each counterfactual distribution as follows:
Definition 1 (Layer 3 Valuation). An SCM M induces layer L3 (M), a set of distributions over V,
each with the form P (Y∗ ) = P (Y1[x1 ] , Y2[x2 ],... ) such that
                                            Z
         P M (y1[x1 ] , y2[x2 ] , . . . ) =   1 Y1[x1 ] (u) = y1 , Y2[x2 ] (u) = y2 , . . . dP (u),
                                                                                          
                                                                                                    (1)
                                        DU

where Yi[xi ] (u) is evaluated under Fxi := {fVj : Vj ∈ V \ Xi } ∪ {fX ← x : X ∈ Xi }.                    
Each Yi corresponds to a set of variables in a world where the original mechanisms fX are replaced
with constants xi for each X ∈ Xi ; this is also known as the mutilation procedure. This procedure
corresponds to interventions, and we use subscripts to denote the intervening variables (e.g. Yx ) or
subscripts with brackets when the variables are indexed (e.g. Y1[x1 ] ). For instance, P (yx , yx0 0 ) is the
probability of the joint counterfactual event Y = y had X been x and Y = y 0 had X been x0 .
SCM M2 is said to be P (Li ) -consistent (for short, Li -consistent) with SCM M1 if Li (M1 ) =
Li (M2 ). We will use Z to denote a set of quantities from Layer 2 (i.e. Z = {P (Vzk )}`k=1 ), and we
use Z(M) to denote those same quantities induced by SCM M (i.e. Z(M) = {P M (Vzk )}`k=1 ).
We use neural causal models (NCMs) as a substitute (proxy) model for the true SCM, as follows:
Definition 2 (G-Constrained Neural Causal Model (G-NCM) (Xia et al., 2021, Def. 7)). Given a
causal diagram G, a G-constrained Neural Causal Model (for short, G-NCM) M c(θ) over variables V


                                                     3
