                                                        Imperfect World Models are Exploitable


                                                      Logan Mondal Bhamidipaty1∗ Esmeralda S. Whitammer1                                David Abel1
                                                                 Mykel J. Kochenderfer2              Subramanian Ramamoorthy1
                                                                      1                                      2
                                                                          University of Edinburgh                Stanford University




arXiv:2605.15960v2 [cs.AI] 18 May 2026
                                                                                               Abstract
                                                     We propose a novel definition of model exploitation in reinforcement learning. In-
                                                     formally, a world model is exploitable if it implies that one policy should be strictly
                                                     preferred over another while the environment’s true transition model implies the
                                                     reverse. We analogize our definition with a prior characterization of reward hacking
                                                     but show that the associated proof of inevitability does not transfer to exploitation.
                                                     To overcome this obstruction, we develop a general theory of reward hacking
                                                     and model exploitation that proves that exploitation is essentially unavoidable on
                                                     large policy sets and yields the corresponding claim for hacking as a special case.
                                                     Unfortunately, we also find that the conditions that guarantee unhackability in
                                                     finite policy sets have no counterpart that precludes exploitation. Consequently, we
                                                     introduce a relaxed notion of exploitation and derive a safe horizon within which
                                                     it can be avoided. Taken together, our results establish a formal bridge between
                                                     reward hacking and model exploitation and elucidate the limits of safe planning in
                                                     world models.


                                         1    Introduction
                                         Efficient real-world planning typically requires approximating complex dynamics (Simon, 1955;
                                         Javed and Sutton, 2024). In the best case, well-chosen approximations unravel otherwise intractable
                                         problems, as with admissible heuristics in search (Hart et al., 1968), model reduction in dynamical
                                         systems (Antoulas, 2005), and latent-space world models in sequential decision-making (Hafner et al.,
                                         2019). In the worst case, however, ill-chosen approximations can compromise safety, as with mimicry
                                         in evolutionary biology (Bates, 1862), arbitrage in financial markets (Ross, 1976), and speedrunning
                                         in video games (Scully-Blaker, 2014). In reinforcement learning (RL), this liability arises not only
                                         exogenously from adversaries but also endogenously from the optimizer itself: an agent trained to
                                         maximize total expected reward under an imperfect model2 may discover behavior that performs
                                         well in simulation but poorly in reality (Jakobi et al., 1995; Tobin et al., 2017). This failure mode is
                                         called model exploitation (Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018; Janner et al., 2019), and a natural question is
                                         whether it can be avoided.
                                         This question pertains to notable results in RL theory including the simulation lemma (Kearns
                                         and Singh, 2002) and the value equivalence principle (Grimm et al., 2020). Both implicitly use
                                         predictive performance to measure the quality of a model’s approximation. The simulation lemma
                                         does so cardinally by bounding the error from optimizing under an imperfect model, while the value
                                         equivalence principle does so locally by characterizing when two models induce identical Bellman
                                         updates. Modern world models also emphasize predictive performance, typically learning latent-space
                                         models of transitions (Hafner et al., 2019; Balestriero and LeCun, 2025).
                                             ∗ l.m.bhamidipaty@ed.ac.uk
                                             2We use “model” to mean the transition model of a Markov decision process (Section 2) or an agent’s approximation to it,

                                         sometimes called a world model (Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018). We do not use it to mean the policy (as a generative model of
                                         actions) as is sometimes meant in other RL literature.


                                         Preprint.
We argue that while this emphasis on performance is necessary for efficient planning, it is not
sufficient for safe planning. Recent work on reward specification (Hadfield-Menell et al., 2017; Abel
et al., 2021) views reward functions as observations of the designer’s intent to communicate a goal,
which may be an imperfect reflection of a true objective. Empirical transition models are similarly
imperfect. In this setting, the natural notion of safety is ordinal rather than cardinal (does the model
preserve which policies are better than which?) and global rather than local (does it do so across the
entire policy set, not just on the chosen classes?). Concretely, a proxy model is safe in our sense if it
does not invert the policy ordering induced by the true model. That is, whenever reality prefers a
policy π over π ′ , a safe approximation should not prefer π ′ over π. When such an inversion exists,
we say the pair of transition models is exploitable (Definition 1).
Our formalization of model exploitation is analogous to the notion of reward hacking in Skalse et al.
(2022). Unfortunately, their characterization of when hacking exists and is avoidable does not transfer
to exploitation (Section 3.2). We overcome this by introducing a more general theory, from which
four main contributions emerge.

1. We propose a new definition of model exploitation (Definition 1) that, to the best of our knowledge,
   is the first ordinal notion of safety for world models.
2. We develop a unified theory of reward hacking and model exploitation that characterizes ex-
   ploitation on common policy sets (Corollaries 1 and 2), yields Theorem 1 of Skalse et al. (2022)
   as a special case (Corollary 3), and provides a shared geometric intuition for both phenomena
   (Lemmas 1 and 2).
3. We give a construction reducing any instance of model exploitation to one of reward hacking
   (Proposition 3), but show that a converse construction does not exist (Counterexample 1). We
   further prove that the conditions that guarantee unhackability are insufficient to guarantee unex-
   ploitability (Counterexample 2).
4. We introduce a relaxed notion of model exploitation, ε-exploitability (Definition 3), and use
   the tight form of the simulation lemma (Kearns and Singh, 2002) recently proved by Lobel and
   Parr (2024) to derive a safe horizon for discounted Markov decision processes within which
   ε-unexploitability is guaranteed (Theorem 2).


2     Preliminaries

We first recap the preliminaries for reinforcement learning (Sutton et al., 1998) and introduce our
definition of model exploitation.

2.1    Reinforcement learning

We consider a Markov decision process (MDP) M = (S, A, T , d0 , R, γ) where S is the state
space, A is the action space, T : S × A → ∆(S) is the transition model, d0 ∈ ∆(S) is the initial
state distribution, R : S × A → R is the reward function, and γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor. As in
Skalse et al. (2022), we assume finite S with all states reachable and finite A with |A| > 1.
A stationary policy π : S → ∆(A) maps each state to a distribution over actions. A non-stationary
policy π = (π0 , π1 , π2 , . . . ) is a sequence of mappings πt : S → ∆(A), allowing the action
distribution to depend on the time step.P∞ Rolling out a policy produces a trajectory τ = (s0 , a0 , r0 , . . . )
whose discounted return is G(τ ) = t=0 γ t rt . The value of a policy is its P    expected return J(π) =
Eτ ∼π [G(τ )], or, equivalently, J(π) = ⟨R, FTπ ⟩ where FTπ (s, a) = Eτ ∼π [ t=0 γ t 1(st = s, at =
                                                                                    ∞

a)] are the discounted visit counts of π under T . We make the standard assumption in classical
RL and optimal control (Sutton et al., 1998; Bertsekas, 2012) that designers use value to compare
policies and prefer high-value policies over low-value ones.
An environment is an MDP without a reward function (S, A, T , d0 , _, γ),3 and a task is an MDP
without a transition model (S, A, _, d0 , R, γ). When considering multiple reward functions in a fixed
environment, we write JR (π) = ⟨R, F π ⟩ (dropping the subscript on F π when T is fixed). When
considering multiple transition models in a fixed task, we write JT (π) = ⟨R, FTπ ⟩. We use Ji as

    3 This is sometimes called a controlled Markov process.




                                                              2
               (a) T2 is trivial      (b) T1 , T2 equivalent       (c) T1 , T2 exploitable   (d) T1 , T2 exploitable
                 J1
                 J2

    J(π)



           0      θ          1 0            θ          1 0 π     π0 θ             1 0 π     θ π
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                       1

Figure 1: Taxonomy of transition model relationships in a 3-state MDP (Appendix D). Policies are
parameterized by πθ (a0 | s) = θ for all s ∈ S. Each panel has the same T1 but a unique T2 . (a) T2 is
trivial, so J2 is constant. (b) T1 , T2 are equivalent (in policy ordering): both value functions increase
in θ, preserving the policy ordering. (c, d) T1 , T2 are exploitable: dotted lines show the exploiting
pair (π, π ′ ) from Definition 1, with J1 (π ′ ) > J1 (π) but J2 (π) > J2 (π ′ ).


shorthand for JRi or JTi depending on whether the index ranges over reward functions or transition
models.
Since S and A are finite, the space of stationary policies can be represented as a product of |S|
probability simplices ∆(A)|S| . We write Π+ for the interior of this space, consisting of all policies
with π(a | s) > 0 for every s ∈ S and a ∈ A. Unless otherwise specified, openness is taken with
respect to Π+ . We provide a reference list of notation and terminology in Appendix A.

2.2        Defining model exploitation and reward hacking

We define model exploitation as a binary relation between two transition models.
Definition 1 (Model Exploitation). Transition functions T and T ′ are exploitable relative to a policy
set Π and a task (S, A, _, d0 , R, γ) if there exist π, π ′ ∈ Π such that
                                   JT (π) > JT (π ′ )    and       JT ′ (π ′ ) > JT ′ (π),
otherwise they are unexploitable.
Intuitively, model exploitation says that optimizing under one transition model may look like a
mistake under the other. This definition directly analogizes the notion of reward hacking in Skalse
et al. (2022) with transition models in place of reward functions. We restate their definition below.
Definition 2 (Reward Hacking, Skalse et al. (2022)). Reward functions R and R′ are hackable
relative to a policy set Π and an environment (S, A, T , d0 , _, γ) if there exist π, π ′ ∈ Π such that
                                   JR (π) > JR (π ′ )    and       JR′ (π ′ ) > JR′ (π),
otherwise they are unhackable.
Both definitions are instances of a common primitive, which we call value inversion. We say
two value functions J1 and J2 admit a value inversion on Π if there exist π, π ′ ∈ Π such that
J1 (π) > J1 (π ′ ) and J2 (π ′ ) > J2 (π). Thus, model exploitation is a value inversion between JT and
JT ′ , and reward hacking is a value inversion between JR and JR′ .
We further say J1 and J2 are equivalent on Π if they induce the same ordering on Π and that a value
function J is trivial on Π if J(π) is constant on Π (Figure 1). Informally, equivalence means that two
value functions agree on every pairwise comparison between policies, while triviality means there
are no meaningful comparisons to make. We also use trivial and equivalent to describe transition
models and reward functions as shorthand for the corresponding properties of the value functions
they induce. We note that triviality precludes value inversion and that value inversion is symmetric,
irreflexive, and not necessarily transitive.

3          Results
To understand when model exploitation is avoidable, we ask a single question with increasing
precision: on which policy sets can we find non-trivial, non-equivalent, unexploitable transition
model pairs? We begin with the largest possible policy set and progressively tighten the scope.


                                                               3
