                                         Temporal Straightening for Latent Planning
                                         Ying Wang1 , Oumayma Bounou1 , Gaoyue Zhou1 , Randall Balestriero2 , Tim G. J. Rudner3 ,
                                         Yann LeCun1∗ , and Mengye Ren1∗
                                         1
                                           New York University 2 Brown University 3 University of Toronto
                                         Correspondence to {yw3076,yann.lecun,mengye}@nyu.edu
                                         https://agenticlearning.ai/temporal-straightening




arXiv:2603.12231v1 [cs.LG] 12 Mar 2026
                                             Abstract
                                             Learning good representations is essential for latent planning with world models. While pretrained
                                             visual encoders produce strong semantic visual features, they are not tailored to planning and contain
                                             information irrelevant—or even detrimental—to planning. Inspired by the perceptual straightening
                                             hypothesis in human visual processing, we introduce temporal straightening to improve representation
                                             learning for latent planning. Using a curvature regularizer that encourages locally straightened latent
                                             trajectories, we jointly learn an encoder and a predictor. We show that reducing curvature this way
                                             makes the Euclidean distance in latent space a better proxy for the geodesic distance and improves
                                             the conditioning of the planning objective. We demonstrate empirically that temporal straightening
                                             makes gradient-based planning more stable and yields significantly higher success rates across a suite
                                             of goal-reaching tasks.




                                         1     Introduction

                                         Latent world models offer a compelling solution for        Original Space       PCA(DINO)            PCA(Ours)


                                         planning because they introduce abstraction that
                                         improves efficiency and generalization (Nguyen and                          PC2                 PC2
                                         Widrow, 1989; Sutton, 1991; Ha and Schmidhuber,
                                         2018; Hafner et al., 2020, 2021, 2023; Hansen et al.,
                                         2022, 2024). They compress high-dimensional obser-                                 PC1                  PC1


                                         vations into compact latent representations, learn
                                                                                               Figure 1: Latent trajectories encoded by a pretrained
                                         predictive dynamics in that latent space, and enable
                                                                                               visual encoder are usually highly curved, increasing the
                                         imaginary rollouts for action optimization. Com-
                                                                                               difficulty of prediction and planning. We learn a repre-
                                         pared to operating directly in pixel or state space,
                                                                                               sentation space where feasible trajectories are straighter.
                                         the latent abstraction reduces dimensionality and
                                         ignores noise, making dynamics learning easier and more efficient. At test time, planning is typically posed
                                         as optimizing an action sequence by rolling the model forward and minimizing a cost function between the
                                         goal and the predicted terminal state in the latent space.
                                         In practice, however, optimization in the learned latent space remains challenging. The induced planning
                                         objective is typically highly non-convex, potentially causing gradient-based optimizers to struggle. As a

                                         * Equal advising.


                                                                                                                                               Page 1 of 33
Temporal Straightening for Latent Planning                                                                    Wang et al.



                              PCA(DINO)                       MSE(DINO)         PCA(Ours)                   MSE(Ours)




                                              MSE to target                                 MSE to target
                        PC2                                               PC2




                                 PC1                            time              PC1                         time

                              PCA(DINO)                       MSE(DINO)         PCA(Ours)                   MSE(Ours)




                                              MSE to target                                 MSE to target
                        PC2                                               PC2




                                 PC1                            time              PC1                         time


Figure 2: Latent trajectories before vs. after straightening. The upper PushT example is a rotation and the
bottom UMaze example shows the agent traveling from the left top to the right top, with the star denoting
the target. Straightening yields less curved and smoother trajectories, and makes Euclidean distance a more
faithful proxy for geodesic progress towards the goal. More examples are shown in Section D.2.

result, many successful practices (Hafner et al., 2019; Hansen et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2025; Sobal et al.,
2025; Terver et al., 2025) rely on search-based methods such as CEM (Rubinstein, 1997) or MPPI (Williams
et al., 2015), which achieve competitive performance but introduce a substantial compute burden and
latency. Moreover, commonly used goal cost metrics based on Euclidean distance can be misleading if
the embedding space is not properly regularized. In particular, when latent trajectories are highly curved,
straight-line distances in embedding space misrepresent the geodesic distance along feasible transitions.
These challenges call for better representations that are tailored for latent planning.
What is a “good” representation for latent planning? Large-scale visual pretraining provides powerful
semantic-aware features, but it is not tailored to the dynamics of the environments and often retains
plenty of planning-irrelevant low-level details. We argue that planning could benefit from representations
that are (i) sufficient for predicting dynamics but without task-irrelevant information and (ii) properly
regularized so that embedding distances reflect the geodesic distance and gradient-based optimization is
reliable. With such representations, we can exploit the differentiability of latent world models and enable
efficient gradient-based planning, bypassing the need for computationally expensive search-based methods.
Inspired by the perceptual straightening hypothesis in human vision (Hénaff et al., 2019), which posits
that visual systems transform complex videos into straighter internal representations, we introduce a
simple approach to straighten latent trajectories for planning. Concretely, we jointly learn an encoder
and a predictor of a world model, while imposing regularization on the curvature of latent trajectories
during training. The resulting encoded trajectories are significantly straighter, with Euclidean distances
better aligned with geodesic distances (Figure 2). We prove that reducing curvature improves convergence
of gradient-based planners, and observe superior empirical gains across a suite of goal-reaching tasks:
open-loop planning success improves by 20–60% and MPC by 20-30% with a simple gradient-based planner.


2    Related Work

While early visual world models directly predict in pixel spaces and use generated images for control (Oh
et al., 2015; Finn and Levine, 2017; Ebert et al., 2018; Du et al., 2023), an increasing number of recent works

                                                                                                             Page 2 of 33
Temporal Straightening for Latent Planning                                                           Wang et al.



first encode high-dimensional sensory inputs into compact latent representations and plan in the resulting
latent space. Learning representations is central to these latent world models.
To obtain meaningful representations for world modeling, prior methods add reconstruction-based objectives
when training the encoder along with the predictor (Watter et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2019; Levine et al., 2020;
Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018; Hafner et al., 2019, 2020; Micheli et al., 2023; Robine et al., 2023). However, these
reconstruction objectives overemphasize low-level visual details that are unnecessary for planning and may
fail to capture task-relevant information. More recent approaches decouple perception from dynamics by
leveraging strong pretrained visual encoders (Nair et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2025; Bar et al., 2025; Goswami
et al., 2025; Bai et al., 2025; Assran et al., 2025). Closest to our setup, DINO-WM (Zhou et al., 2025) trains
task-agnostic predictors and plans directly in frozen DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2024) feature space. While
DINOv2 features provide high-quality visual representations, they are not optimized for planning and may
lead to planning objectives that are challenging to optimize. In this work, we improve the representation
space for planning by introducing a straightening regularization during world model training.
Joint-Embedding Predictive Architecture (JEPA) emerges as a promising paradigm for world models by
learning representations through prediction (LeCun, 2022; Bardes et al., 2024; Assran et al., 2025). It aims to
capture predictable structure without retaining unpredictable low-level details, making it more effective
and efficient than reconstruction-based objectives (Assel et al., 2025). This paradigm has been shown to be
effective for predictive modeling and planning, with training from scratch on offline simulator data (Sobal
et al., 2025) and large-scale real-world video pretraining followed by action-conditioned post-training for
robotic planning (Assran et al., 2025). Our work also belongs to the JEPA family and focuses on learning
better representations.
Temporal Contrastive Learning (Sermanet et al., 2018; Dave et al., 2022; Eysenbach et al., 2024; Yang and Ren,
2025) is also a popular paradigm for learning representations that can reflect the temporal relationships. It
encourages temporally close frames to have similar embeddings while distant frames have more dissimilar
embeddings through InfoNCE loss (Radford et al., 2021). However, how to choose positive and negative
samples requires careful tuning and this objective might push away geodesically close states if suboptimal
trajectories are used. Instead, our regularization-based method doesn’t require negatives and applies local
straightening without requiring expert trajectories.
Motivated by the perceptual straightening hypothesis in human vision (Hénaff et al., 2019), some prior
works have examined implicit straightening in pretrained visual encoders (Harrington et al., 2023; Internò
et al., 2025) or used it as an objective to obtain robust video models (Niu et al., 2024; Bagad and Zisserman,
2025). Implicit straightening is also observed in autoregressive language models optimized for next-word
prediction (Hosseini and Fedorenko, 2023; Hosseini et al., 2026). To the best of our knowledge, however,
none of these prior works have studied the impact of straightening on planning.


3    Temporal Straightening

We consider control tasks with high-dimensional observations ot ∈ Rno of an agent interacting with its
environment using actions at ∈ Rna . Our goal is to learn a world model that maps observations to a latent
space and models the dynamics in this space, which we use for latent planning.
In this section, we first outline the architecture of our world model, then define the training objectives with
a novel geometric regularization that straightens latent trajectories.




                                                                                                     Page 3 of 33
