                                         Presented as a poster at the World Modeling Workshop 2026




                                         VALUE -G UIDED ACTION P LANNING                                                WITH          JEPA
                                         W ORLD M ODELS
                                             Matthieu Destrade 1,2∗, Oumayma Bounou3 , Quentin Le Lidec3 , Jean Ponce2,3 , Yann LeCun3
                                          1
                                             École Polytechnique 2 ENS Paris 3 New York University

                                                                                      A BSTRACT

                                                     Building deep learning models that can reason about their environment requires
                                                     capturing its underlying dynamics. Joint-Embedded Predictive Architectures




arXiv:2601.00844v1 [cs.LG] 28 Dec 2025
                                                     (JEPA) provide a promising framework to model such dynamics by learning repre-
                                                     sentations and predictors through a self-supervised prediction objective. However,
                                                     their ability to support effective action planning remains limited. We propose an
                                                     approach to enhance planning with JEPA world models by shaping their repre-
                                                     sentation space so that the negative goal-conditioned value function for a reach-
                                                     ing cost in a given environment is approximated by a distance (or quasi-distance)
                                                     between state embeddings. We introduce a practical method to enforce this con-
                                                     straint during training and show that it leads to significantly improved planning
                                                     performance compared to standard JEPA models on simple control tasks.


                                         1        I NTRODUCTION
                                         World models are a class of deep learning architectures designed to capture the dynamics of systems
                                         (Ha & Schmidhuber (2018); Ding et al. (2025)). They are trained to predict future states of an en-
                                         vironment given a sequence of actions. By explicitly modeling the system’s dynamics, they capture
                                         a causal understanding of how actions influence future outcomes, enabling reasoning and planning
                                         over possible trajectories.
                                         Among the various architectures proposed to implement such models, Joint-Embedded Predictive
                                         Architectures (JEPA) (LeCun (2022)) provide an effective framework for learning predictive repre-
                                         sentations. By optimizing a self-supervised prediction loss, JEPA models jointly learn representa-
                                         tions of states and predictors that map past states and actions to future representations. This formula-
                                         tion has proven effective for both representation learning (Assran et al. (2023); Bardes et al. (2024))
                                         and action planning (Sobal et al. (2025); Zhou et al. (2025)), the latter referring to the optimization
                                         of action sequences that drive a system from an initial state to a goal state.
                                         In this work, we aim to enhance the planning capabilities of JEPA models. Inspired by advances
                                         in reinforcement learning, we learn representations such that the Euclidean distance (or a quasi-
                                         distance) between embedded states approximates the negative goal-conditioned value function as-
                                         sociated with a reaching cost (Park et al. (2024b;a); Wang et al. (2023)). This structure provides
                                         a meaningful latent representation space for planning, potentially mitigating local minima during
                                         planning optimization. We evaluate our method on control tasks and observe that incorporating such
                                         representations consistently improves planning performance compared to standard JEPA models.

                                         2        R ELATED WORK
                                         2.1       JEPA WORLD MODELS

                                         Joint-Embedded Predictive Architectures (JEPA) (LeCun (2022)) provide an effective way to im-
                                         plement world models for representation learning and action planning. They rely on the hypothesis
                                         that predicting future states is easier in a learned representation space than in the original observa-
                                         tion space, and that enforcing predictability encourages meaningful representations. A JEPA model
                                         typically consists of a state encoder, an action encoder, and a predictor. It is trained on sequences
                                         of states and actions by minimizing a prediction loss, Lpred , between a predicted representation and
                                              ∗
                                                  Correspondence: matthieu.destrade@polytechnique.edu


                                                                                             1
Presented as a poster at the World Modeling Workshop 2026




that of the actual state resulting from applying a given action. To prevent collapse during training,
standard approaches use a VCReg loss, LVCReg , as in Sobal et al. (2025), or an exponential moving
average (EMA) scheme, as in Assran et al. (2023); Bardes et al. (2024).
Recent works (Sobal et al. (2025); Zhou et al. (2025)) have applied JEPA models to action-planning
tasks, showing promising yet still limited performance. To do so, they employ a model predictive
control (MPC) procedure (Garcı́a et al. (1989)), which iteratively minimizes a planning loss mea-
suring the distance between predicted and goal representations over a finite horizon.

2.2   L EARNING A VALUE FUNCTION

To improve the effectiveness of MPC, several works have proposed learning a value function to
guide the MPC procedure Farshidian et al. (2019); Jordana et al. (2025). This approach allows MPC
to account for longer time horizons, and can stabilize the procedure by providing an additional cost
term whose minimization facilitates goal-reaching tasks.
Implicit Q-Learning (IQL) Ghosh et al. (2023); Kostrikov et al. (2021); Xu et al. (2023) learns a
goal-conditioned value function from unlabeled trajectories by leveraging expectile regression. The
authors of Park et al. (2024b) leverage IQL to learn a structured representation space for states of a
system, where the negative Euclidean distance approximates a goal-conditioned value function cor-
responding to the terminal cost in a reaching objective. They show that these representations enable
solving various reinforcement learning tasks efficiently. Since a goal-conditioned value function
is not symmetric in general, additional work has proposed learning it using a quasi-distance Wang
et al. (2023).

3     VALUE - GUIDED JEPA FOR ACTION PLANNING
To improve the planning capabilities of JEPA models, we focus on enhancing the representations
used to compute the MPC planning cost. In the standard JEPA framework, planning is performed
by minimizing the distance between a predicted state and the goal in the representation space. How-
ever, this cost can have numerous local minima, making optimization challenging. To address this,
we propose learning representations such that the Euclidean distance in the representation space
corresponds to the negative of the goal-conditioned value function associated with a reaching cost
in a given environment, as in Park et al. (2024b). Unlike previous works, we focus on using these
representations for planning with JEPA models and MPC procedures, rather than solely for pol-
icy execution. Under this formulation, setting the planning cost to the learned value function and
minimizing it naturally drives the model toward the goal.

3.1   BASELINE LOSS FUNCTIONS

To enforce the value function criterion in the representation space, we consider several simple loss
functions for the state encoder of a JEPA model, which serve as baselines. Specifically, we apply
a contrastive loss Lcontrastive using successive states from training trajectories as positive examples
and random pairs of states as negative examples, as well as a regression loss Lregressive explicitly
enforcing the distance between successive states to be 1.

3.2   IQL FOR JEPA MODELS

Let S0 be the state space, θ the parameters and Eθ the state encoder of a JEPA model. For
all (s, g) ∈ S02 , we define Vθ (s, g) = −∥Eθ (s) − Eθ (g)∥2 . Our goal is to learn θ such
that Vθ approximates the goal-conditioned value function V ⋆ associated with the reaching cost
C : (s, a, g) 7→ 1s̸=g , which penalizes all time steps where the state s is not equal to the goal g.
Let (T, N ) ∈ N2 represent the length of the training trajectories and the number of training goals.
Let D be a dataset of trajectories (st )t∈J0,T K belonging to S0T +1 and goals (gn )n∈J0,N K belonging to
S0N +1 . We minimize the mean IQL loss with respect to θ via gradient descent:
                                                N T
                                                X X −1                                                 
 ∀((st ), (gn )) ∈ D,   LθVF ((st ), (gn )) =             L2τ −1st ̸=gn +γVθ̄ (st+1 , gn )−Vθ (st , gn ) , (1)
                                                n=0 t=0


                                                      2
Presented as a poster at the World Modeling Workshop 2026




where ¯· denotes a stop-gradient ; τ, γ ∈]0, 1[ are close to 1 ; and for all x ∈ R, the term
 L2τ (x) = |τ − 1x<0 | x2 performs expectile regression. The parameter γ is the discount factor of
the value function we aim to learn. In practice, we use two different types of goals: the last state of
the training trajectories, and random goals sampled from the training batches.
To obtain a better approximation, we further explore replacing the Euclidean distance in the defi-
nition of Vθ with a quasimetric distance, following Wang et al. (2023). The quasi-distance used to
learn V ⋆ is the generic form introduced in Wang & Isola (2022).
We consider two approaches to training JEPA models. The first approach, which we call “Sep”,
consists of training the state encoder alone using the LVF objective, followed by training the action
encoder and predictor with the Lpred loss. The second approach consists of training all networks
together using as objective the sum of LVF and Lpred .


4     E XPERIMENTS

4.1    E XPERIMENT SETTINGS

We conduct our experiments in two environments under an offline reinforcement learning setting.
Models are trained with random trajectories sampled in the environments. The states used as in-
puts to our models are observation images, potentially including additional sensory information. A
detailed description of the datasets used is provided in the Appendix 7.1.
The wall environment consists of a square space separated by a wall with a door. The positions of
the wall and door are randomly initialized when the environment is instantiated. The agent has to
move from a random starting position to a random goal located on the opposite side of the wall. It
can execute actions that are vectors corresponding to displacements. We generate datasets with two
settings: WS, with actions of small norms, and WB, with actions of larger norms.
The maze environment consists of an agent that must move from a random starting point to a ran-
dom goal within a random maze. Its actions are velocity commands. Planning in this environment
requires that both the agent’s position and velocity be encoded in the representations, as it simulates
inertia. Following a similar approach to Sobal et al. (2025), we include the agent’s velocity as an
input to the encoders for a given state.

4.2    P LANNING WITH THE REPRESENTATIONS

We conduct experiments to evaluate the planning performance of different learning methods. Specif-
ically, we train JEPA models with:

       Name        State encoder loss     Sep         Name               State encoder loss      Sep
     Contrastive        Lcontrastive       ✓         VF pred                    LVF               ×
     Regressive    Lregressive & LVCReg    ✓         VF quasi           LVF & quasi-distance      ✓
    pred VCReg            LVCReg           ×       VF quasi pred        LVF & quasi-distance      ×
     pred EMA       EMA procedure          ×        VF VCReg               LVF & LVCReg           ✓
         VF                 LVF            ✓      VF VCReg pred            LVF & LVCReg           ×

                                    Table 1: Training approaches

The precise settings of the experiments are described in Appendix 7.2.
We assess the quality of the learned representations by evaluating the planning accuracy of the
model, defined as the proportion of successful plans for random pairs of initial states and goals. We
compute this success rate on 200 instances of the wall environment and 80 of the maze one, so that
the variance of the results is small. We use an MPC procedure with an MPPI optimizer. The results
are displayed in Table 2.
They show that IQL-inspired approaches provide valuable guidance during planning and achieve
better results than intuitive or prediction-based approaches, as used in Sobal et al. (2025). Interest-
ingly, the VF quasi approach consistently outperforms the VF approach, even when the theoretical


                                                  3
